CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE 137

Plasma
membrane

  
  
  

Peripheral
microtubules
(doublets)

Interdoublet
bridge

Radial i / microtuble

(a) spoke (b)

Figure 8.10 Section of cilia/ﬂagella showing different parts : (a) Electron micrograph
(b) Diagrammatic representation of internal structure

8.5.8 Cilia and Flagella

Cilia (sing: cilium) and ﬂagella (sing: ﬂagellum) are hair-like outgrowths
of the cell membrane. Cilia are small structures which work like oars,
causing the movement of either the cell or the surrounding ﬂuid. Flagella
are comparatively longer and responsible for cell movement. The
prokaryotic bacteria also possess ﬂagella but these are structurally
different from that of the eukaryotic ﬂagella.

The electron microscopic study of a cilium or the ﬂagellum show that
they are covered with plasma membrane. Their core called the axoneme,
possesses a number of microtubules running parallel to the long axis.
The axoneme usually has nine doublets of radially arranged peripheral
microtubules, and a pair of centrally located microtubules. Such an
arrangement of axonemal microtubules is referred to as the 9+2 array
(Figure 8.10). The central tubules are connected by bridges and is also
enclosed by a central sheath, which is connected to one of the tubules of
each peripheral doublets by a radial spoke. Thus, there are nine radial
spokes. The peripheral doublets are also interconnected by linkers. Both
the cilium and ﬂagellum emerge from centriole-like structure called the
basal bodies.

8.5.9 Centrosome and Centrioles

Centrosome is an organelle usually containing two cylindrical structures
called centrioles. They are surrounded by amorphous pericentriolar
materials. Both the centrioles in a centrosome lie perpendicular to each
other in which each has an organisation like the cartwheel. They are