284

l Physics

 

 

SUMMARY

Maxwell found an inconsistency in the Ampere’s law and suggested the
existence of an additional current, called displacement current, to remove
this inconsistency. This displacement current is due to time—varying electric
field and is given by

8d¢E

i = —
d 0 C1 t
and acts as a source of magnetic field in exactly the same way as conduction

current.

An accelerating charge produces electromagnetic waves. An electric charge
oscillating harmonically with frequency v, produces electromagnetic waves
of the same frequency v. An electric dipole is a basic source of
electromagnetic waves.

Electromagnetic waves with wavelength of the order of a few metres were
first produced and detected in the laboratory by Hertz in 1887. He thus
verified a basic prediction of Maxwell's equations.

Electric and magnetic fields oscillate sinusoidally in space and time in an
electromagnetic wave. The oscillating electric and magnetic fields, E and
B are perpendicular to each other, and to the direction of propagation of
the electromagnetic wave. For a wave of frequency v, wavelength A,
propagating along z—direction, we have

E =Ex(t] =E0sin[kz—cot)

lznlé—wll=Eosml2n(%—%Jl

B = By(t) = B0 sin [kz - a) t)

= B0 sin [21:6 — vtj] = Bo “[24; _ 3]

They are related by EO/B0 = c.

The speed c of electromagnetic wave in vacuum is related to ,uo and so [the
free space permeability and permittivity constants} as follows:

c = 1/ Jﬂo £0 . The value of 0 equals the speed of light obtained from

optical measurements.

Light is an electromagnetic wave; 0 is, therefore, also the speed of light.
Electromagnetic waves other than light also have the same velocity c in
free space.

The speed of light, or of electromagnetic waves in a material medium is

given by v = l/Jﬂs
where [.1 is the permeability of the medium and 8 its permittivity.

Electromagnetic waves carry energy as they travel through space and this
energy is shared equally by the electric and magnetic fields.

Electromagnetic waves transport momentum as well. When these waves
strike a surface, a pressure is exerted on the surface. If total energy
transferred to a surface in time t is U, total momentum delivered to this
surface is p = U/c.

The spectrum of electromagnetic waves stretches, in principle, over an
infinite range of wavelengths. Different regions are known by different

2019-20